Seqr metadata templates and instructions (#22)
populationgenomics/rare-disease: resources/seqr_metadata_templates/README.md

| Birth Year | Numeric year of birth. E.g. 2010 | If you have collected a DOB, e.g. 01-01-2001, please only include the **year** component. |
| Death Year | Numeric year of death, if applicable. <br /> Leave blank otherwise. | If you have collected a DOD, e.g. 01-01-2001, please only include the **year** component. |
| Age of Onset | **One of the following:** <br /><br />Congenital onset, <br />Embryonal onset, <br />Fetal onset, <br />Neonatal onset, <br />Infantile onset, <br />Childhood onset, <br />Juvenile onset, <br />Young adult onset, <br />Adult onset, <br />Middle age onset, <br />Late onset | *This is a rough suggestion, with no clinical source.*<br /> <br /> **Congenital onset:** conception to birth <br /> **Embryonal onset:** conception to 8 wks gestation <br /> **Fetal onset:** 9 wks gestation to birth<br />  **Neonatal onset:** birth to 1 month, <br /> **Infantile onset:** birth to 1 year<br /> **Childhood onset:** < 5 years<br /> **Juvenile onset:** < 17 years<br /> **Young adult onset:** < 25 years<br /> **Adult onset:** < 36 years<br /> **Middle age onset:** < 55 years<br /> **Late onset:** > 55 years

> | Individual Notes | Alphanumeric characters |   |

Author: Should any of these empty description fields be filled in, or are they ok blank?

Reviewer: > Should any of these empty description fields be filled in, or are they ok blank?

All fields are optional other than `Family ID` and `Individual ID`.

However, now that you mention it it would be good to move `Individual Notes` up to the third row and add a comment that this is a free text field that will be displayed in seqr. It can be a good place to describe the individual's presentation and any features important for variant curation.

# Organising rare disease data and metadata for seqr <!-- omit from toc -->

![CPG Logo](../images/cpg_logo_1280x329.png)

## Table of Contents <!-- omit from toc -->

---

- [1. Genomic Data](#1-genomic-data)
- [2. Pedigree\_template](#2-pedigree_template)
- [3. Families\_metadata\_template (Optional)](#3-families_metadata_template-optional)
- [4. Individuals\_metadata\_template](#4-individuals_metadata_template)
- [5. Sample\_mapping\_template](#5-sample_mapping_template)

---

### i. Purpose

> The purpose of this document is to provide instructions on how to prepare project specific data and metadata for use in seqr<br /> related to an individual's family history (pedigree).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the CPG to process and display your genomic data in seqr we require some additional information about the genomic data and the individuals it was generated from. This document provides instructions on how to prepare project-specific data and metadata for use in seqr.
```

<br />

### ii. Background

> The CPG utilises four distinct metadata files to provide information about samples to the variant curation team as they <br /> perform variant analysis in seqr.

Reviewer: Do we need the inline `<br />`s? It will handle wrapping natively wont it?

Author: Yeah, I think I got a bit fixated on making everything appear nice in the markdown preview while I was writing this up that I completely forgot about all the different devices and screen sizes this will be viewed from. 
I'll get rid of some of these since they will look silly with the native wrapping in there as well

The four files are described in Table 1.

A template for each of these files is provided in section iii. Quick Links, and instructions for filling out each template<br /> are included in this document.
<br />
<br />

#### **Table 1:** Definitions of the metadata files used in rare disease projects <!-- omit from toc -->

> 

Reviewer: Can we add a column with direct download links to each file? eg something like:
```
| Download |
| [csv](url) <br /> [excel](url) |
```

|     **Metadata template**    |     **Required**    |     **Description**    |
|:---:|:---:|:---|
|     *Pedigree_template*    |     **Yes**    |     Template file used to describe the individuals in each dataset <br />and how they relate to other individuals in <br />the same dataset, mainly their parents.<br /><br />The information in this file is used to generate<br /> the participant pedigrees*.    |
|     *Families_metadata_template*    |     No    |     Template file used to describe the families in each dataset. |
|     *Individuals_metadata_template*    |     **Yes**    |     Template file used to describe the clinical information <br />related to individuals in each dataset. |
|     *Sample_mapping_template*    |     **Yes**    |     Template file used to map individual IDs AND sample IDs<br /> back to the files that have been transferred. |

*A pedigree is a structured description of the phenotypical and familial relationships between samples.

> The CPG uses the tool ‘GATK HaplotypeCaller’, which can incorporate pedigree information in the genomic analysis of samples.

Reviewer: HaplotypeCaller does not make use of pedigree info.
```suggestion

```

<br />

### iii. Quick Links

1. [Excel templates](excel_templates/)<br />

2. [csv templates](csv_templates/)<br />

> 3. [tsv templates](tsv_templates/)<br />

Reviewer: Do we need tsv and csv or should we just pick one (presumably csv for multi-line escaping in notes fields)?

Author: I agree it's probably not necessary to have both. I'm happy to just reduce it to csv
